 Edward Parker Helms[1] (born January 24, 1974) is an American actor, comedian, writer, and producer. He has played paper salesman Andy Bernard in the NBC sitcom The Office (2006–2013), a correspondent on Comedy Central's The Daily Show, and starred as Stuart Price in The Hangover trilogy. He provided the voice of The Once-ler in Illumination’s The Lorax and the titular character in DreamWorks Animation's Captain Underpants: The First Epic Movie. In 2021, he starred in the comedy series Rutherford Falls. Helms was born in Atlanta, Georgia. He is of English, Irish, German, Dutch, and French descent. Helms had open-heart surgery at age 13 to correct a severe congenital heart defect, which he described as supravalvular aortic and pulmonic stenosis.[2][3] According to Helms, his surgery lasted nine hours, and he was kept in an intensive care unit for one week after.[4] He attended Interlochen Center for the Arts as a youth and graduated from The Westminster Schools one year after The Office castmate Brian Baumgartner in 1992.[5] Helms entered Oberlin College as a geology major but ended up graduating in 1996 with his Bachelor of Arts in film theory and technology. He spent a semester as an exchange student at New York University's Tisch School of the Arts.[6][7][4] After graduating from Oberlin, Helms began his comedy and acting career as a writer and performer with New York City sketch comedy bands, and studied improvisation with the Upright Citizens Brigade troupe.[8] Helms concurrently worked as a trainee film editor at Crew Cuts, a post-production facility in New York City. While doing so, he recorded some rough voiceover scratch tracks that eventually led to paying voiceover work, which in turn led to finding a talent agent.[9] Helms was performing comedy in New York City when, as he recalled in a 2005 interview, "The Daily Show had a sort of open audition with a casting company that I had dealt with. I read for the part, and got it".[10] In his April 2002 to mid-2006 tenure on the satirical news program, Helms contributed "field reports" in addition to hosting various segments of the show, such as "Digital Watch", "Ad Nauseam", and "Mark Your Calendar". He has also contributed to the "This Week in God" segment. His 2005 segment "Battle of the Bulge", which focused on the wearing of Speedo bathing suits on the beaches of Cape May, New Jersey, and his "Mass. Hysteria" segment, in which he reported criticism of Massachusetts when it became the first state to legalize gay marriage, are regarded by TV Guide as his signature segments on the program.[11] Helms left the show in 2006, but occasionally returned for brief appearances over the next two years. On July 21, 2008 he returned for Obama Quest – a segment covering Senator Barack Obama's trip to Iraq. He also occasionally narrated the "Prescott Group" educational films on sister series The Colbert Report. In late July 2006, NBC announced that Helms was added to the cast of the mockumentary The Office, alongside fellow The Daily Show correspondent Steve Carell, in a recurring role as Andy Bernard, a nostalgic Cornell graduate who is obsessed with a cappella music. Helms was a series regular starting with the 3rd season.[12] "He had so much in common with this character we wanted to create," recalled Paul Lieberstein, a writer for the show who also plays Toby Flenderson, the human resources representative at the Scranton branch of Dunder Mifflin. "I can't remember when they started merging."[13] Helms returned to The Daily Show on December 5, 2006, stating he had been gone because he was "undercover at a paper company in Scranton", an allusion to his stint on The Office. In February 2007, NBC announced that Helms had been promoted to series regular, and in February 2010 Helms was added to the show's opening credits. Helms quickly became a solidifying part of the cast, and eventually came to be one of the show's producers. In June 2009, on a radio interview with National Public Radio, Helms said that like his character, Andy Bernard, he has an interest in a cappella music. Helms has also appeared on such television shows as The Mindy Project, Wilfred, NTSF:SD:SUV, Tanner on Tanner, Childrens Hospital, Arrested Development and Cheap Seats, and in various Comedy Central specials. He was the celebrity guest on the August 3, 2015 survival skills reality show Running Wild with Bear Grylls, coming to grips with his fear of heights on the Colorado Mountains.[14] He has done commercial voiceover work in campaigns for Burger King, Doritos, Hotels.com, Sharp Aquos and Advair asthma medication, and he voices Neil the Angel, a character on Cartoon Network's Weighty Decisions series. Helms plays guitar, banjo, piano, as well as a sitar, in some of his entertainment performances. In August 2014, it was announced that Helms will star in Alejandro González Iñárritu's new Starz television drama series The One Percent, with Hilary Swank and Ed Harris,[15] though he was later replaced by Greg Kinnear.[16] Helms was also slated to serve as an executive producer on the upcoming television series adaptation of the web series Jake and Amir, whose pilot was later rejected by TBS.[17] He also co-created the Peacock sitcom Rutherford Falls with Sierra Teller Ornelas and Michael Schur. Helms starred in the 2011 film Cedar Rapids and co-starred in the blockbuster The Hangover film trilogy as Stuart Price. He had minor roles, including Night at the Museum: Battle of the Smithsonian, Blackballed: The Bobby Dukes Story, Meet Dave, Harold & Kumar Escape from Guantanamo Bay, I'll Believe You, Evan Almighty, Semi-Pro and, with The Office co-star Jenna Fischer, Walk Hard: The Dewey Cox Story. In 2009, Helms appeared in The Goods: Live Hard, Sell Hard, directed by Neal Brennan and starring Jeremy Piven, and in 2012, he voiced the Once-ler in The Lorax. He played the lead role, Rusty Griswold, in the 2015 film Vacation, a sequel/spin-off of the National Lampoon's Vacation series.[18] The film began shooting in September 2014 in Helms' native Atlanta, with Christina Applegate playing Rusty's wife Debbie Griswold.[19] In 2015, Helms starred in Jessie Nelson's movie, Love the Coopers.[20] In 2017, he starred in The Clapper as Eddie Krumble, a paid audience member for infomercials and experiences a whirlwind of unwanted overnight fame after a late-night talk show host publicizes his frequent infomercial appearances. Helms voiced the title role in the DreamWorks animated film Captain Underpants: The First Epic Movie (2017).[21] In 2013, he was attached to star in the unproduced Paramount Pictures Naked Gun reboot.[22] Helms played Joe Gargan in the 2018 film Chappaquiddick. Helms is in a bluegrass band called The Lonesome Trio with his friends Ian Riggs and Jacob Tilove. They formed the band when they were at Oberlin College and still get together to play a few shows every year. They recorded an eponymous album in summer 2013 shortly after appearing on the Bluegrass Situation stage at the Bonnaroo festival, which Helms curated.[23][24] Helms is a self-confessed "bluegrass nerd" and founded the annual LA Bluegrass Situation festival.[25] Helms plays banjo, guitar and piano.[26] He and Amy Reitnouer co-founded a music blog also titled The Bluegrass Situation. It summarizes its mission as "Creating and covering content across every level of the international scene, ranging from timeless traditional bluegrass, blues, and old-time to contemporary singer/songwriter, Americana, folk, and everything rootsy beyond and in between."[27] On April 22, 2020, The Bluegrass Situation debuted The Whiskey Sour Happy Hour, a weekly music and comedy program benefitting the MusiCares COVID-19 Relief Fund and Direct Relief. Helms features in the video for Mumford and Sons' song "Hopeless Wanderer".[28] In 2015, he had a cameo appearance in the band's music video for the song "The Wolf".[29] Helms launched his own production company, Pacific Electric Picture Company, in 2013. The company has a two-year development deal with Universal Television.[30] In 2013, Helms co-wrote, produced, and starred in the Yahoo! Screen web series Tiny Commando, about a former Navy SEAL who is accidentally shrunken in a military experiment to four inches in height. Subsequently, he is deployed to places where his unique size allows him to infiltrate strategically.[31] Helms is a board member at RepresentUs,[32] a non-profit organization seeking to pass anti-corruption laws in the United States. Helms is married and has one daughter.[33] Helms is the recipient of an honorary Doctor of Fine Arts from Knox College, where he delivered the 2013 Commencement.[34] In May 2014, Helms gave the convocation speech at Cornell University, alma mater of Andy Bernard, the character he portrayed for seven seasons on The Office.[35][36] In May 2015, Helms gave the commencement speech at the University of Virginia.[37]